+++
title = "Development Highlight: New schematic and symbol library file formats are now the default"
date = "2020-05-05"
draft = false
+++

:icons:
:iconsdir: /img/icons/


The new s-expression schematic and symbol library file formats are now
the default and should be available as soon as the nightly builds are
complete. All new schematics and symbol libraries will be created
using the new file formats. All existing schematics will be converted
to the new file format on the first load and all subsequent changes
will be made to the new file format. The old schematic files remain
unchanged and no further edits will be made made. It is still a good
idea to make a backup of all existing schematic files just in case
something goes wrong.

There are a few things to be aware of when switching between the 5.1
and development branches:

Please allow all library symbol rescuing and remapping to complete to
ensure that the library symbols will be saved to the schematic files.
If either of these steps are aborted, saving the schematic will
certainly result in broken symbol links which will require manual
intervention to resolve.

The symbol library cache is no longer required for the new file
format. Converting back to the legacy file format may result in broken
symbol links so avoid converting between formats. Schematics are now
fully portable without the cache library.

Version control software users must add the new schematic files
(*.kicad_sch) to ensure change control is maintained.

In the short term, the ability to save schematics and symbol libraries
to the old file format will be maintained for testing purposes. Once
new schematic and/or symbol library features are added, saving to the
old file format will be deprecated to prevent data loss between format
conversions.

The new schematic file format fixes a long standing bug when sharing
schematic files between projects. Prior to the new file format,
sharing files between projects in a simple hierarchical design
required the symbol annotation to be maintained in the shared file(s).
This limitation has been removed and the annotation can be changed in
the shared file because annotations for the entire project are saved
in the root schematic file. Root schematics can also be shared by
other projects as well because annotations in hierarchical sheet
schematic files are ignored and are not changed by the project.

Sheet and symbol time stamps are converted to UUIDs which changes the
sheet paths of the schematic. You must update the board from the
schematic using references before making any changes to the schematic
to ensure the symbol links are updated correctly. If you do not have a
fully annotated board, it is highly recommend that you update with an
older nightly build to ensure the symbol links do not get corrupted
before converting to the new format.

If you want to give the board import a spin, simply download the
latest KiCad nightly. Feel free to link:/help/report-an-issue/[report
any issues] you may find.

Thank you for your patience as we work through any issues with the new
file formats. Once the existing feature set is stable, expect to see
new schematic and symbol library features added fairly quickly.

If you want to join in on a discussion on this feature, you may find a
forum thread with the developer
https://forum.kicad.info/t/kicad-nightly-v5-99-new-schematic-and-symbol-library-file-formats-are-now-the-default/22655[here]

NOTE: Both this feature and nightly builds are in development, please
only use them for testing and experimentation

**KiCad Development Team**
